# Module 5: Understand (ISC)² Code of Ethics

Domain D1.4.1

## Module Objective

-   L1.5.1 Analyze appropriate outcomes according to the canons of the (ISC)2  Code of Ethics when given examples.
- Manny: We've made it to the last module of our first chapter. Tasha: That's right. And we've learned that cybersecurity professionals have a lot of responsibility when it comes to protecting information systems and the data that is stored and used on them. Manny: Yes, we put a lot of trust in them that they will do the right thing. I'd feel more comfortable knowing that they must take some kind of oath or something, so we could rest assured they’re acting in the best interest of their organizations and the public. Tasha: I agree, Manny. Ethical guidelines are extremely important. It gives the profession credibility. And you know what? Manny: What? Tasha: All members of (ISC)2 commit to adhere to its code of ethics. Manny: That makes me feel better. Let’s find out more about it.
# Importance of a Professional Code of Ethics
file audio codeEthics.mp3
Transscript
Chad: Good morning, good afternoon, or good evening, depending on where and when you're listening. Welcome to the discussion on the role of ethics in cybersecurity. I'm your host, Chad Kliewer, holder of the CISSP and CCSP certifications, and current (ISC) 2 member, and I'll be facilitating our experience. I am extremely excited to welcome our special guest for today's discussion, Eder de Mattos, who holds the CISSP with the ISSAP endorsement, ISSMP, and CCSP credentials, and is also an active (ISC) 2 member. Eder joins us today from Brazil, where he's worked in communications, now works for an international cloud services organization, and he's also the treasurer for the (ISC) 2 Sao Paulo chapter. So let's get started. And today we'll start our discussion by illuminating an example code of ethics. So in this example, for all information security professionals who are certified by (ISC) 2 , are required to adhere to (ISC) 2 Code of Ethics, there are only four canons, and we'll paraphrase them now. "To protect society, the common good, and infrastructure." The second one is "act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly, and legally." And the third, "provide diligent and competent service to principals." And the final canon is "advance and protect the profession." So this is just one example of professional ethics, and it can take many forms. So, Eder, I'm curious, how do you define professional ethics, based on your experience? Eder: Hi, Chad. Hi, everyone. Thank you for this, for inviting me for this session. It's a pleasure to be here with you today. And about this question, I think it's, ethics is mandatory for everyone in cybersecurity nowadays. And we are in face of a lot of different situations. And we need to have a strong feeling of ethics, because dealing with different conditions, I think what I learn about (ISC) 2 , and with complementary, with my background, ethics are fundamental to keep working in our area nowadays. I think (ISC) 2 gives us a solid pillars, for pillars about ethics. And during my profession or in my career, I was learning that it's important, incorporate these conditions about (ISC) 2 , reinforce in every certification, in every document, in every publication, and join with feelings about what I learned when I was a kid, about my father told me in the past, my family, I think it's a, the role is a, we need to join any point that you learn, and apply in our market, in cybersecurity. I think it's the main point. Chad: Okay, great. And I would like to hear a little bit more about, in your experience, and how those ethics influence your concept of right and wrong? Eder: A lot, a lot. Because the market and the conditions of economic and wars and stuff like that, we have different situations for dealing about this point. Recently, last year, I received a bribery. Someone invite me to disclose sensitive informations, and will pay a huge amount of money. And no, no thanks. It was a very different situation for me. And I call the legal authorities here in Brazil, and I sent them all the informations about the communication. I was invited by email, you know, it's a point that, it's me. My honor is not on sale. And I think this point is mandatory. And in the profession, we have daily, we are in face with these situations daily, because we have many criminal organizations interesting in achieve our information, because we are in face of customers' information, company information. And in the black market, these information have paramount value. It's a, it's this. I think that's it. Chad: And that's a great story. And that's part of why I was so excited to talk to you, and talk to you about ethics, is so we could gather more of the international perspective. And you mentioned that somebody had contacted you through the mail for a bribe. Is that something, and I don't want to single out Brazil, and say this only happens in Brazil, because I know it happens other places, it happens here in the U.S. as well, but is that something, do you think that's more commonplace in Brazil, or is it still somewhat rare to happen? Eder: I think in Brazil, happens a lot, because we have problem with our society here. It's a society that, if someone have the opportunity to achieve advantage, or some gifts or whatever, the people are in face, and sometimes they accept the offer. It's not my case in this situation. And as I mentioned, my honor is not for sale, but here in Brazil we have this difficulty, because the corruption in our society is, it's hard. Chad: Yeah, absolutely, so I'm trying to figure, you know, I'm really curious, does that, you know, you said it's something that does happen often in Brazil. So is it also something that, is it, I want to say people from Brazil that are making those bribery offers, is it something that seems to be domestic, or is it international, is it other countries that are, and you don't need to name other countries if that's the case, I'm just curious if that's something that's internal to the country, or something that's other countries? Eder: We have both scenarios here. We have competitors here. We have scenarios of malware or ransom groups. It's like criminal groups, like Conti or other groups responsible for hijacking or ransom inside main companies, very important companies around the world. And it's common in both cases, from international and from internal national, internal nation here, because the culture here is a point for difficult dealing. And we have specific areas in our police departments, and fiscalizations for avoid corruption and bribery. It's a sad point, present in our society here in Brazil. Chad: Okay, great. And from what you've talked about so far, you definitely believe in the (ISC) 2 code of ethics. You obviously have your own code of ethics that might be apart from what your country is. And obviously you have been in cybersecurity for a while, and you are a great cybersecurity practitioner, but what do you think makes your chosen profession, a professional? What makes you a professional in cybersecurity? Eder: About describing about my roles or my activities or why I chose working for cybersecurity, is this question? Chad: Yes. Eder: I think I start working for cybersecurity, or for security area, because cybersecurity doesn't exist 10 years ago. When I start working for this area, why, for why, or why I decided to work in this area, because, the first point, in security you have people with strong feelings about what is correct. And this is my point. My father recommend me in the past for become a judge, because I, to enforce the correctness, enforce the correct points about situations. But it's too many papers. No, it's not for me. In cybersecurity, you have a lot of papers, these documentation policies and whatever, but it's more applicable, or it's feasible with our reality. Apply something and affect a lot of people and companies about this point. And this is for, this is, was, this was my mainly reason for decide for cybersecurity, because strong feeling about what's correct, enforce the correctness, enforce what is possible. And yes, now we have some situations that are not totally correct, but we are in face of risk and risk analysis. And we need to deal about a project in face of our appetite of risk. And I think this point. Chad: All right, and that's a great story. And we are so glad you chose cybersecurity over being a judge, because we're happy to have you here today. And we might not be talking if you had chosen that judge path. So that's great. I'm curious, though, in your perception, what makes the code of ethics in cybersecurity different from those in other professions? Eder: I think in cybersecurity, we need to follow in more restrict way all points of ethics, because we are in face about the whole information, the company's, because we are security area. And security area needs to protect the company. In this case, we need to be a simple example for other people inside the company, as strong professionals, professionals that have a very good position in face of any problems or any circumstance that is not following the right way. I think it's, and security area, cybersecurity area, we enforce all points about ethics for other areas. About courses, about internal communication, about trainings for other areas that's not in face daily with problems with security or whatever, but show them about ethics, and why is important to keep ethics in current work, day to day. Chad: That is great. And I really like that you see cybersecurity professionals as being a basically a role model in the world of ethics. And that's super, I really like that. So I want to know if you can share a specific situation, and I know you already shared one with us, about the bribery, but if you can share a situation where ethics played an impactful role in your decision making. Eder: Yes, of course, in many projects the teams ask me, "Oh, let's forget these points about security, because will impact our work. We need to work a lot for compliance with these points. It's possible to forget this point." No. Because we need to enforce all points for security. And in every project, someone tries to resume the way of security, not implement all features, or avoid some important point. And I used to tell these guys, "No, if you commit some mistake here, or you produce a code without a compliant, without a wrong, a right check about this code, probably we will have a large problem in front." And is not the case, we need to have a strong feeling about security, about ethics, about condition for improve security, not for reduce security. I think this is the condition that I'm facing in many situations nowadays. Chad: Yep, you are absolutely right. And that's something that we constantly, as cybersecurity professionals, have to apply our ethics to, to produce, or basically to make our decisions based on what may be best for the company, not necessarily what's best for the cybersecurity professional. Eder: Yes. Chad: And I think that's something that oftentimes is very difficult for the cybersecurity professional to do. Sometimes we have to, you know, sometimes we do have to make those decisions that are better for the organization than maybe for us personally, or make our life a little bit more difficult to better protect the organization. Eder: Yes, yes. I agree, I agree. Chad: Yep. You are absolutely right. Ethics play a huge part in that. Go ahead. Eder: Yes, in another case, when some project, "No, we are not able to fill all security points." In this case, we produce a letter about risks, and request approval for a senior manager, senior management, or director, or vice president, or yes, if you are not compliant and you need to go ahead with this project, with this poor condition of security, you need to agree with this point, and agree that this is your responsibility. If you have some fail or some problem in the future, you are charged about this point. Chad: Yep. Absolutely. And I think we, you know, for our listeners, I think we did cover part of that in our risk management section, we'll cover that. In talking about, you know, when there is risk, when we're introducing new risk, part of our ethics are to make sure that we are raising the awareness of that risk, and making sure that the business owners fully understand that risk. Whether it makes us popular or not, doesn't matter. Sometimes we have to take the unpopular road, and at least raise that up. So that's some great discussion, and we're gonna wrap up here in just a moment, Eder. It's been great talking to you, but I do want to give you one last chance, if you have anything else you'd like to say to our listeners. Eder: Yes, I think for anyone that is interesting in starting cybersecurity, cybersecurity is a code of life, because someone that start working for cybersecurity, or someone that worked for a long time in cybersecurity, we use these concepts in our life, in our society. And we are advocates. We are people to transmit security and cybersecurity and ethic codes for people around us. And I think it's a point to everyone that is starting cybersecurity, pay attention in the code of ethics, and strong feeling about what is right. I think it's the main point, and our society needs this condition, a strong, or improve these values now. Chad: All right, absolutely. Thank you. And I think it is just absolutely great the way you put that, that underline and that highlight, that ethics really does lie underneath everything we do as cybersecurity professionals. And I thank you very much for helping us put an international eye on this. So we can see, a lot of times we think of terms in our own country, and how things happen in our own countries. And that's part of what (ISC) 2 strives to do, not only here, but for the cybersecurity profession as a whole, to make sure that we are one team and we have one common goal, one common set of ethics across the world. But I thank you many, many times, Eder, thank you for spending time with us today. Thanks for sharing your knowledge and your perspective on ethics, and everybody, please join me in thanking Eder de Mattos for volunteering his time with us here today. Thank you very much. Eder: Thank you. Thank you, Chad. It was a pleasure to be here. And thank you, guys, and enjoy the cybersecurity


# Professional Code of Conduct

All information security professionals who are certified by (ISC)²  recognize that certification is a privilege that must be both earned and maintained. Every (ISC)² member is required to commit to fully support the (ISC)² Code of Ethics. 

_Click on each tab below to learn more._
## (ISC)2 Code of Ethics PREAMBLE
The Preamble states the purpose and intent of the (ISC)2 Code of Ethics. 

-   The safety and welfare of society and the common good, duty to our principals, and to each other, requires that we adhere, and be seen to adhere, to the highest ethical standards of behavior.
-   Therefore, strict adherence to this Code is a condition of certification.


## (ISC)2 Code of Ethics CANONS

The Canons represent the important beliefs held in common by the members of (ISC)2. Cybersecurity professionals who are members of (ISC)2 have a duty to the following four entities in the Canons.  

-   Protect society, the common good, necessary public trust and confidence, and the infrastructure.
-   Act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally. =
-   Provide diligent and competent service to principals.
-   Advance and protect the profession.

For more information on the Code of Ethics, please visit the (ISC)² website.

# Theoretical Example: Code of Ethics

## video codeEthicsExampe.mkv

Narrator: Here is an example of an ethical question that might come up for cyber security professionals. An organization handling Top Secret and other sensitive information was hiring new employees. At its facility, it used a retinal scanner to grant access to high-security areas, including where prospective employees were interviewed. Retinal scanners, unbeknownst to most people, can not only match blood vessels on an individual’s retina, but they can also tell the difference between males and females. Further, they can tell whether a female is pregnant. The organization used this information gathered by its access control system to discriminate against female candidates for the positions it was seeking to fill. Allowing this data to be accessed by those making hiring decisions was indisputably in violation of the (ISC)2 Code of Ethics, which states that information security professionals must act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally. Here is another example: The security manager for an organization heard from a network administrator who reported another user for violating the organization’s acceptable use policy. When the security manager investigated the matter, he discovered several pertinent facts: • The user did violate the policy. • The violation was not a criminal matter. • The network administrator had the IT permissions to monitor the user. • The network administrator was not tasked with monitoring the user, nor was the administrator tasked with randomly monitoring all users. • The network administrator would not say how the administrator came to learn that the user was violating policy. • In talking with colleagues of both people, it became clear that there was a personal conflict between the administrator and the user. In many jurisdictions, the organization can use any information, regardless of source, to make labor decisions. So yes, the organization could use this information against the user. The user violated the policy but did not break the law. Depending on how egregious the infraction was, the organization may choose to punish the user for the violation. Because the administrator would not explain why he was monitoring the user, it makes his actions suspect at best, and nefarious at worst. The administrator violated the trust given to him by the organization; as an IT professional, the administrator was expected to use authority and permissions in an adult and objective manner. This situation is almost certainly an example of the administrator using authority to settle a personal grievance. The administrator should be punished much more severely than the user (firing the administrator is not untoward; this person may have opened the organization up to a lawsuit for creating a hostile work environment, which may have an impact/risk that exceeds whatever policy violation the user committed). Whether the administrator was terminated or not, his actions were in clear contradiction of the Code of Ethics.


# Applying the Code

True or False? All (ISC)2 members commit to uphold and adhere to the Code of Ethics Canons. (D1, L1.5.1)

 True
# What is the Appropriate Action?

Cranz is an (ISC)² member and an employee of Triffid Corporation. One of Cranz’s colleagues offers to share a file that contains an illicit copy of a newly released movie. What should Cranz do? (D1, L1.5.1)

 A. Inform (ISC)²

Incorrect. The (ISC)² Code of Ethics requires that members “act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally.” The Code, however, does not require that members report violations to (ISC)².

 B. Accept the movie

Incorrect. The (ISC)² Code of Ethics requires that members “act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally.” Accepting or participating in the distribution of intellectual property owned by someone else would be counter to this Canon, and it would also go against the Canon requiring that (ISC)² members “advance and protect the profession.”

 C. Refuse to accept

Correct. The (ISC)² Code of Ethics requires that members “act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally.” Refusing to accept or participate in the distribution of intellectual property owned by someone else would be counter to this Canon, and it would also go against the Canon requiring that (ISC)² members “advance and protect the profession.”

 D. Inform law enforcement

Incorrect. The (ISC)² Code of Ethics requires that members “act honorably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally.” The Code, however, does not require that members act as law enforcement agents, so Cranz is not required to report the matter to law enforcement, or to (ISC)².

Check Answer
